[Music]
so two guys walk into a bar really no
seriously two guys walk into a bar an
ice cream bar Dave a physicist working
on the Large Hadron Collider at CERN the
European laboratory for particle physics
and Steve a blues singer Dave how's it
going Steve good to see you two scoops
of chocolate almond for me vanilla shake
hey I just saw something about the LHC
on TV you guys found Bozo in your
detector well not exactly
we found a boson probably the Higgs
boson what's that that's a particle
don't you find particles all the time
yes but this one means that the Higgs
field might really exist field what
field the Higgs field it's named after
Peter Higgs although many others
contributed to the idea it isn't a field
like where you grow corn but a
hypothetical invisible kind of force
field that pervades the whole universe
hmm okay if it provides a whole universe
how come I've never seen it it's a bit
strange actually it's not that strange
think of the air around us we can't see
it or smell it well perhaps in some
places we can but we can detect its
presence with sophisticated equipment
like our own bodies so the fact that we
can't see something just makes it a bit
harder to determine whether it's really
there or not all right
go on so we believe this Higgs field is
all around us everywhere in the universe
and what it does is rather special
he gives mass to elementary particles
what's an elementary particle an
elementary particle is what we call
particles that have no structure that
can't be divided they're the basic
building blocks of the universe so those
were atoms well atoms are actually made
of smaller components protons neutrons
and electrons while electrons are
fundamental particles neutrons and
protons are not they're made up of other
fundamental part
was called quarks sounds like Russian
dolls does it ever end actually we don't
really know but our current
understanding is called the standard
model in it there are two types of
fundamental particles the fermions that
make up matter and the bosons that carry
forces we often order these particles
according to their properties such as
mass we can measure the masses of the
particles but we never really knew where
this mass came from or why they have the
masses they do so how does this Higgs
field thing explain mass well when a
particle passes through the Higgs field
it interacts and gets mass the more it
interacts the more mass it has okay I
kind of get that but is it really that
important I mean what if there were no
Higgs field if there were no Higgs field
the world wouldn't exist at all
there'd be no stars no planets no air no
anything not even that spoon or the ice
cream you're eating well that'll be bad
okay but where does this Higgs boson fit
into things all right now you see the
cherry in my shade can I have it no not
yet
we have to use it as an analogy first
all right that cherries the Higgs boson
no not quite the cherry is a particle
moving through the Higgs field the shape
the shape gives the cherry its mass I
get it okay so the molecules of the
shake are the Higgs bosons while you're
getting closer
it takes an excitation of the Higgs
field to produce a Higgs boson so for
example if I were to add energy by say
dropping this cherry in the shape well
then the drops that spill on the bow of
the Higgs bosons almost the splash
itself is the Higgs boson are you
serious well that's what quantum
mechanics teaches us in fact all
particles are excitations of fields okay
right well I kind of see why you like
particle physics it's quite cool strange
but cool yeah you could call it a bit
strange it's not like everyday life
the Higgs boson is an excitation of the
Higgs field by finding the Higgs boson
we know that the Higgs field exists
right so now you've found it we know
this Higgs field exists
you must be done is there anything left
particle physics actually we've just
begun it's a bit like you know when
Columbus thought he had found a new
route to India he did indeed found
something new but not quite what he was
expecting so first we need to make sure
that the boson we found is actually the
Higgs boson it seems to fit but we need
to measure its properties to be sure how
to do that
take a lot more data this new boson
lives for only a very short time before
it breaks down or decays into lighter
more stable particles by measuring these
particles we learn about the properties
of the boson and what exactly are you
looking for well the standard model
predicts how often and in what ways the
Higgs boson would decay to the various
lighter particles so we want to see if
the particle we have found is the one
predicted by the standard model or if it
fits into other possible theoretical
models and if it fits a different model
that would be even more exciting in fact
that's how science advances we replace
old models with new ones if they better
explain our observations right so it
seems like finding this Higgs boson
gives a direction for exploration a bit
like that Columbus guy heading west
exactly and this is really just the
beginning